>>Robert Anton Wilson.
Robert Anton Wilson is
co-author with Robert Shea
of the underground classic,
"The Illuminatus!" trilogy.
His other writings include
"Schrodinger's Cat"
trilogy called "the most
scientific of all science
fiction novels."
His novel "Illuminatus!" was
adapted as a one-hour science
fiction rock epic.
>>10-hour.
>>How many?
>>10-hours.
Bob, who sees himself
as a futurist,
author, and now,
a sit-down comic.
Bob regularly gives
seminars at Esalen
and lectures at the Prophets
conferences around the world.
Let's give a big, warm welcome
to Robert Anton Wilson.
>>That was very nice.
If you kept on applauding
a little longer,
I wouldn't have to think
of anything to say.
The time would get used up.
It's true I once
described myself
as a guerrilla ontologist.
That was back in the '70s.
In the '80s, I decided guerrilla
ontologist kept getting
me confused with King Kong.
So I started pronouncing it
as its original Spanish form,
"gureeya" ontologist.
Nobody knew what the
hell I was talking about.
Then I read two
books in which I was
described as a postmodernist.
One was a sociological
textbook and the other
was a book of
literary criticism.
I figured if a literary
critic and a sociologist
can both consider
me a postmodernist,
I might as well use
that as my label.
So I was calling
myself a postmodernist
for a while, until I read some
of the other postmodernists
and decided I didn't want to
be associated with them at all.
So now I just call myself
a damned old crank,
which I think covers the
situation much better
than either of my
previous labels.
But if anybody wants to call
me a guerrilla ontologist,
that's OK.
[GRUNTING]
Well, I'm supposed to be talking
about-- the title of my talk
is "The Universe
Contains a Maybe."
And to start with, I'll take
off of where Dr. Kaku left off
yesterday, Schrodinger's cat.
Maybe I'm here
and maybe I'm not.
Which is to say, in some
eigenstates, I got here safely.
In some eigenstates, the cab
carrying me here from the hotel
crashed into a bread truck.
And I got killed, and
I didn't get here.
Why are you seeing me? 'Cause
you're in one of the universes
where I did get here.
There's another universe
where you're all sitting here
looking at an empty stage,
waiting to hear news
about where the hell I am.
And I hope you would at least
have a slight pang of remorse
when you heard about the bread
truck and my body scattered
all over Amsterdam
Avenue and all of that.
According to the
Everett-Wheeler-Graham
interpretation of the
Schrodinger's cat problem,
the cat's alive
in some universes
and dead in other universes.
That doesn't just apply to a
cat with a complicated trap
that Schrodinger invented.
Every time there's
a 0.5 probability,
the universe splits in two.
And we get more
and more universes.
You might be happy to
know, those of you who
aren't really into
surrealism, that this only
applies to possible universes.
But if it's a possible
universe, it exists somewhere
in hyper space.
There's a universe where
Marilyn Monroe actually
succeeded in persuading
John Kennedy to divorce
Jackie and marry her.
And she became First Lady.
I wish I had lived in
that universe instead
of the mess we're in now.
In that universe,
the whole world
might have become
a lot more liberal.
And I could have got a
little bit of cocaine
this morning to wake
me up before performing
at this ungodly hour.
As it is, I'm stuck
in a universe where
a crackhead in the
White House could throw
all the poor crackheads in jail
and has hired somebody tougher
than the previous czar
to carry that out.
Who the hell wants to live
in a universe like that?
Of course, that
may be just a libel
spread by the Democratic party.
Maybe George isn't
a crackhead anymore.
There's a website
that sells buttons
with a picture of George,
His Fraudulency George II.
They have a button
with a picture of him,
and it says, "Not a
crackhead anymore."
Doesn't that cheer you up?
That kind of cheers me
up, sort of, in a way.
I loved the last election.
It was the first time
in American history
we had to choose between a
pothead who claimed he was not
a pothead anymore and
a crackhead who claimed
he was not a crackhead anymore.
And the public was so
damn confused that nobody
knows who won the election.
As Mr. Justice Stevens
said, "We will never
know with certainty who
won this year's election.
But we do know the loser.
The loser is the
public's confidence
in the integrity of our judges."
That's not a very
funny line, is it?
Well, stop and think about
it for a while though.
John Adams, our second
president, wrote in a letter
to Thomas Jefferson, who
you may have heard of,
he was our third president.
Adams wrote to Jefferson,
"I cannot consider political
history seriously without
either weeping or laughing.
I prefer to laugh."
And that's the way I look at it.
If we got a crackhead in
the White House, well,
I think that's pretty funny.
That's the next
best thing to having
Harpo Marx in the White House.
As for getting back to maybe.
I think I had a few
more anti-Bush jokes,
but they just
slipped from my mind.
At this hour in the
morning, my memory
is not functioning
as well as my tongue.
I can talk, but I can't think
about what I'm talking about.
But oh well.
I think I've had that
problem for years.
I have found a way to get
high and stay spaced out
for hours on end,
and the government
can't take it away from me.
It's called senility.
And there are four major traits.
Increase in long-term memory.
I can wheel myself to the
kitchen when I'm home.
And on the way, I can remember
a fistfight I had with a kid
named Billy Batson in
kindergarten, 65 years ago.
And I can even remember
my life in the womb.
And I can remember
back to when I
was swinging through the
trees with the other apes.
I can remember back
to being a fish.
All evolution opens up before
me in an endlessly retreating
abyss of timeless time.
And then when I
get to the kitchen,
the second effect takes over, a
decrease in short-term memory.
I can't remember what I
went to the kitchen for.
I look around, what the hell?
What am I doing
in this room now?
I thought I was at the computer.
And the third effect.
I don't remember what
the third effect is.
And the fourth is I don't
give a fuck anymore.
The Chinese have a proverb.
I got a friend who just got
his PhD in Chinese language
and literature.
And I quoted this
proverb to him.
And he said he
heard it many times,
but he didn't know where it
came from or who invented it.
He's got a Chinese
wife, raised in Taiwan.
And she's heard it too.
She doesn't know
who invented it.
So I guess it's a folk proverb.
There's no known author.
It says, "The wise are
Confucian in good times,
Buddhist in bad times,
and Taoist in old age."
Now the Confucians try
to improve society.
The Buddhists say,
that's hopeless.
Just try to improve yourself.
And the Taoists say,
I don't give a fuck.
So you see, between
senility and Taoism,
I have arrived at a
remarkable tranquility.
Every time Bush
finds a new excuse
to bomb someplace, instead
of weeping, I laugh.
Oh well, what can you
expect of a species
of domesticated primates but
except the alpha males will
be the ugliest and meanest
ones in the whole damn tribe?
It's part of the
evolutionary script, I think.
Maybe.
I would like to argue,
or propose, or cogitate,
or ruminate, or
blabber to the effect
that if everybody used the
word "maybe" more often,
the whole human race might
suddenly become stark,
staring sane.
Just imagine if
every time you turn
to the high channels
on your TV set,
you'd catch Pat Robertson,
or Jerry Falwell,
or one of those weird people
proclaiming, I tell you,
brethren, maybe Jesus
was the Son of God.
Imagine if you travel through
the Mid-East and every muezzin
was howling from the parapets,
maybe Allah is the only god,
and maybe Muhammad
is his prophet.
Imagine if the Israelis
were going around chanting,
maybe God gave us
this land, and we
can clean off the aborigines.
Imagine, as the
parapsychologists were saying,
maybe this proves the
existence of psy powers.
And CSICOP was
going around saying,
maybe their laboratory methods
were not strict enough.
Imagine if all the
communists that
are left in the world,
all seven of them said,
maybe we need a
violent revolution
to overthrow capitalism.
Imagine if all the conservatives
are going around saying,
maybe we got the best
economic system in the world
even though most
of our population
is living on the streets and
nobody gets adequate health
care.
But maybe it's the best.
Maybe humanity can't
do better than this
because of original sin.
Maybe.
If everybody was going
around saying maybe,
think of how fewer violent
quarrels we'd have.
I've seen some pretty
violent quarrels
between parapsychologists
and members of CSICOP
because none of
them ever say maybe.
The parapsychologists
say, we have proven this.
And the CSICOPs say,
you haven't proven it.
And they got an out too.
They got this
wonderful clause, which
is, "An extraordinary claim
demands extraordinary proof."
Now you could use that against
every argument you hear.
No matter what
anybody says, you say,
that's an
extraordinary argument.
I demand extraordinary proof.
What the fuck is
extraordinary proof?
Why can't ordinary
proof handle the matter?
But you keep asking for
extraordinary proof,
nobody can ever produce it.
But "maybe" can be a
very powerful word,
especially if you use some
of Korzybski's other devices
to moderate overly dogmatic
Indo-European languages.
For instance, John is
grouchy and irritable.
That's the kind of sentence
you hear all the time.
Suppose somebody said, maybe
John is grouchy and irritable.
Then you might be
ready to accept
the fact that John isn't grouchy
and irritable all the time.
Or if you used
Korzybski's dating
and-- has anybody here ever
hear of Korzybski, by the way?
Hey, what a literate audience.
I think I saw 10 hands
out in the crowd.
Alfred Korzybski was
a Polish mathematician
who proposed the two-valued
Aristotelian either-or
logic does not fit the
universe we live in.
And therefore, we
should abandon it
and use a more flexible
logic, which he
called infinite-valued logic.
Now this is an outgrowth
on Neumann's maybe.
Neumann and his book
on quantum mechanics
handle the Schrodinger's
cat paradox
by saying the cat can
be in three states--
dead, which is 0;
alive, which is 1;
and a half, which is maybe.
And the cat is in the maybe
state until we open the door,
as Dr. Kaku explained yesterday.
And that makes a lot of sense
mathematically because until we
open the door, the cat
is in a maybe state.
"In the math that's
in our head, the cat
is both alive and dead."
Quoting my favorite poet--
that's myself, by the way.
That's from my novel,
"Schrodinger's Cat."
"In every random
quantum state, the cat
remains suspended state in
some quantum eigenstate.
In precisely half the
cases, that's 0.5,
the cat is both dead and alive."
No, I can't quote my own poetry.
It's too early in the morning.
I keep losing the meter and
putting in the wrong words.
Suppose we met two people.
And one said, John is
grouchy and irritable.
And the other said,
John is cheerful
and makes everybody
else cheerful too.
That leads us into a state of
perpetual, which one of them
is inaccurate?
Well, in our language, one of
them has got to be inaccurate.
Our traditional
Indo-European language
has codified it to
Aristotelian logic.
But if we throw in a maybe and
date, and index our statement,
we might come out with something
like, John seemed to me grouchy
and irritable at
the office all week.
And the other one
might be saying,
John seemed very
cheerful and made
everybody else cheerful at
the beach on the weekend.
Now the statements don't
contradict each other at all
because we've modified them
by adding more information
and dropping out the "is"
and putting in "seems to me."
How many times have you
heard people arguing?
Well, maybe you don't hang
out with the same circles
that I do.
Well, let's try it.
How many times have
you heard people
arguing about whether
Beethoven is better
than Mozart or Mozart is
better than Beethoven?
Or the Iron Butterfly is
better than the Sex Pistols.
No, the Sex Pistols are better
than the Iron Butterfly.
That gives you an idea how
much I know about rock.
Both of those examples come
from the '60s and '70s.
Let's go back to
Mozart and Beethoven
where I know a little about
what I'm talking about.
Now if we were to try to talk in
operational functional language
like scientists do
about their instruments,
we have to include
the instrument.
The instrument is
my nervous system.
So before I can get to an
argument about whether Mozart
is better than Beethoven
or Beethoven is better
than Mozart, I'd have
to reformulate it
into language that includes the
instrument and the observer.
So I'd have to say,
in my present mixed
state of musical
knowledge and ignorance,
Beethoven seems better
to be than Mozart.
That might even influence
the guy or the girl
on the other side
of the argument
to say, well, in my
present state of mixed
musical ignorance and knowledge,
Mozart seems a hell of a lot
better than Beethoven to me.
What have we got
left to argue about?
We're not arguing about
Mozart and Beethoven at all.
We're arguing about
our own nervous systems
and how they apprehend music.
And yet most of the
time, we get into these
is arguments as if we're
talking about something
that doesn't include ourselves.
There's an old Sufi story which
you will not disappoint me
if you don't laugh at it.
Nobody ever does laugh at it,
but I still like to use it.
Nasreddin, the wisest
man in all Islam,
was seen racing through
the streets of Baghdad.
This was several
hundred years ago,
so he wasn't trying to get
away from American bombers.
He's racing around on his
donkey through every palazzo,
and alley, and street, and
every place he could race.
And people came out, what
is Nasreddin looking for?
So finally, they started running
out to him, going, Nasreddin,
what are you looking for?
And Nasreddin yelled back,
I'm looking for my donkey.
Oh, I got a laugh that time.
The donkey represents what
we're all looking for,
the answer to all of the
mysteries of the universe,
the mysteries of emotional
life, the mysteries
of intellectual life,
the mysteries of being
a human being.
We look for it everywhere.
And it's carrying us around
all the time like the donkey
that Nasreddin lost track of.
In my workshops,
when I do a workshop,
I usually have the
people describe the hall
outside the workshop room.
I have everybody write out a
list of what they remember.
No two lists are alike,
which illustrates what
I call neurological relativism.
No two people ever pass
through the same hallway.
Each one creates a different
hallway in their head
which they think is
the real hallway.
Just like everybody
thinks Mozart is better
than Beethoven or Beethoven
is better than Mozart.
Except for the
wisenheimers who claim
Wagner is better
than either of them.
But we can do without
them, can't we?
Now if there's any Wagnerians in
the audience, I'm only kidding.
Honest.
The funny thing
about these lists,
after we compare them, it turns
out the person with the longest
list, it's always about
half as long as the list
we get by putting all
the other lists together.
Which indicates the most
observant person, the Sherlock
Holmes in the
group, observes half
of what the whole audience
as a group observes.
So you can always learn
something from everybody else
no matter how dumb or
wrongheaded they seem.
If you listen to
them closely enough,
they know something
you don't know.
So it's worth
listening to everybody.
When I was a wee tot
back in the last ice age,
dinosaurs still
roamed the Earth.
Roosevelt was president.
It was rugged times.
It cost a whole goddamn
dime to go to the movies.
And all you got was an A
movie, a B movie, a travel log,
a cartoon, a "Three Stooges"
comedy, and a news reel,
and a candy bar.
And back in those days, nobody
but the extreme right-wing
Republicans, the most
reactionary bastards
in the country, said, once
they give you a Social Security
number, they'll
keep track of you.
They'll know everything you do.
There will be no privacy left.
It'll be like Nazi Germany.
How can anybody be that crazy?
We've had Social Security
numbers for over 60 years now.
And they're not keeping
track of everything you do.
They don't have everything.
You can cash a check without
putting your Social Security
number on it.
Well, no, you can't.
You could order something
over the internet.
No, you gotta give them
your Social Security number.
Well, actually, they do
know everything we're doing,
don't they?
Besides, they've
got satellites now
that can read the
headline on a newspaper
if you open a newspaper
on the street.
They've got
heat-sensitive helicopters
that can tell which room
of your house you're in.
So the right-wing
reactionaries who
said that they'd be tracking
us through our Social Security
numbers were right after all.
So don't ignore anybody
just because their politics
are different than yours.
They might have a point.
Maybe.
Nasreddin was hired once to
bring 10 donkeys to the market.
So he got on one of
the donkeys and led
the other 9 ahead of him,
and started to the market.
And after about an
hour, he got worried
that he might have lost
a donkey, so he counted.
And there were only 9.
So he got off to look
around for the other donkey.
And he kept patting each donkey
as he walked around till he
found all 10 of them again.
And he got on the donkey
and started riding again.
And after another hour, he
got a bit worried again,
so he started counting.
Only 9.
So he got off his donkey and
walked around, feeling them
by the sides, patting them.
And there were 10 donkeys again.
So he got back on.
This is the disappearing
donkey trick again
in a different form.
And the next time he
found there were 9,
he had to get off, and walk
around, and count them again
on foot.
And there were 10 again.
So around the middle
of the afternoon,
he arrived at the market,
driving 9 donkeys behind him
and carrying 1
donkey on his back.
That always gets a bigger
laugh than the first one.
Well, when I ask people to
describe the hall outside,
they never include themselves.
They never include the observer.
That's another variation of
the disappearing donkey trick.
The kind of science that
everybody at new age
conferences rants
and raves against
and denounces, so-called
Newtonian Descartian science.
Hasn't been taken seriously by
scientists for over 100 years.
With [INAUDIBLE] theorized
of quantum mechanics,
science has become
aware, especially
physics, has become aware
of what Buddhism has always
told us, you can't
leave out the observer.
Any separation between the
observer and the observed
introduces tremendous fallacies.
That's another reason
for putting in the maybe.
When you leave out
the maybe, you're
assuming that your
nervous system,
your brain, your
sensory apparatus
is apprehending
the whole universe.
Which is rather
an unlikely thing.
Do you think you can swallow the
whole universe in your stomach?
Do you think you could inject
all the blood of the human race
into your veins
without exploding?
Do you really think your brain
can contain the whole universe?
That's another reason
for putting a maybe
on most of your statements.
Because everybody knows
things you don't know,
and everything you think you
know is really only a maybe.
Now Korzybski in
1933 recommended
an infinite-valued logic.
I have found, in trying to
teach this to audiences,
that people's
minds go blank when
you say infinite-valued logic.
So I reduced it to
a 10-valued logic.
That's much easier to deal with.
You can extend it to
infinity if you've
got enough decimal places
and enough instruments
to make enough
delicate readings.
Everyday affairs, you can
reduce it to a 10-valued logic.
A 0 to 10.
That's actually
an 11-valued logic
since I just
included the 0 in it.
The 0, you put in everything
you're absolutely sure
has been totally refuted
and can't possibly be true.
Most of that will turn
out to be true later on.
But what the hell,
we're talking about life
in time in which we
were not thinking
about evolution and further
discoveries and so on.
In 10, you put in everything
absolutely sure has been proven
and can never be refuted,
like Newtonian gravity,
for instance.
Oh, no, that's been
refuted by Einstein.
Yeah.
Well, the general
theory of relativity.
No, Hawking is working
on revising that.
Well anyway, in between
the 0 and the 10,
you've got 9 other
places-- 1 to 9.
And just imagine if people
had the philosophy of maybe.
To take an example
it seems, I think,
less emotional and
dogmatically key than most,
one that people don't actually
attack each other with axes
over-- the Loch Ness monster.
Now under the present
Indo-European speaking peoples,
due to the Indo-European
subject-predicate structure
and the either-or logic
that derives from that,
generally divide into people who
say I believe in the Loch Ness
monster, and I don't believe
in the Loch Ness monster.
But in my 11-valued
logic, which I mistakenly
called 10-valued logic because
maybe I'm not fully awake yet.
Since we don't have
accurate scientific data,
I'm using subjective
estimates of probabilities.
I would rate the Loch
Ness monster at about 6.
Which is to say that I feel
enough people have seen
something floating around
in Loch Ness over a period
of a couple hundred years.
So there's probably
something floating around
in Loch Ness besides
ordinary fishy wishies
and guppies and whatnot.
But I'm not 100% sure.
And most people think if
you give up being 100% sure,
if you don't have a
definite yes and no, you're
floating in an abyss
of uncertainties
from which you'll never escape.
But when you start
putting probabilities on,
you find a lot of
things have a 9.
You put them at least at 9.
I feel I'd give a 9
rating to the probability
that the sun is going to seem
to rise tomorrow morning again.
Of course, everybody knows
the sun doesn't really rise.
It's just the Earth rotating.
But we still have this
Neolithic language,
so we talk about the sun rising.
So that's what I mean.
I think there's over
a 9% probability
that I expect that we'll
see the sun again tomorrow,
whether we see it rising,
or whether we stop and think
the sun isn't rising.
The Earth is rotating,
or revolving,
or orbiting around the sun.
So some things have a
very high probability.
Some thing's have a
very low probability.
I was speaking to the Irish
Science Fiction Society
a few years ago.
And in the question
period, somebody asked me,
do you believe in UFOs?
And instead of going
into my maybe logic,
and 10-valued
logic, and so on, I
felt, that's a
straightforward question.
I'll give him a
straightforward answer.
I said, yes, of course.
So he went off into a
tirade to the effect
that all UFOs were
sun dogs, which
are heat inversions caused by
the mixture of water and oxygen
in the atmosphere, which creates
strange glints in the air.
When he finally ran down,
I said, well, we agree.
We both believe
in UFOs, only you
think you know what they are,
and I'm still a bit puzzled.
Which is very strange
because when most people talk
about UFOs, they
either believe in them
or they don't believe in them.
And yet, I don't see how anybody
could possibly deny them.
What does UFO mean?
Most people have
forgotten what it means.
It means Unidentified
Flying Objects.
Well, I see three UFOs every
week, at least, at minimum.
I happen to have a very
nice balcony where I live,
with a view of Monterey Bay.
And I love to sit out there when
I'm not working at my computer.
I love to sit out on the
balcony and look at the view.
I've written more haiku
since I moved there
than I have in my
whole life before.
And it's not because
my health care
worker happens to be Japanese.
She doesn't even know
I'm writing haiku.
I'm writing haiku because
they seem the appropriate form
to describe the views you
see from three floors up,
looking at Monterey Bay.
The view keeps changing.
It's never twice the same
from one hour to the next.
As a matter of fact, I
could condense all my haiku
into two words in
Greek-- rhei panta.
Which is probably the
wrong pronunciation,
but it's the right letters.
That was said by
Heraclitus-- all things flow.
Not only does Monterey flow,
but whether the dolphins
are there that day or not,
that changes over time.
Whether I could see
Monterrey or not
changes depending on how
much fog we've got that day.
So the view keeps
changing, so I keep
writing more haiku to express
my impressions of the changing
views.
And I see at least
three UFOs every week,
especially around twilight.
I see even more of them
after it gets dark.
This does not
particularly impress me
because I'm not quick to
identify things anyway.
I see at least seven
UNFOs every week.
That's Unidentified
Non-Flying Objects.
They go by on the
street so fast,
I don't know what
the hell they are.
I saw a guy without arms
going by just a couple of days
ago on a bicycle.
I think maybe it
was a guy with arms,
only he was holding them down
to test his ability to steer
without using the handlebars.
But I'm not sure.
He's another unidentified
non-flying object.
It was either a guy
without arms or a guy
driving his bike
without using his arms.
I see weirder things
than that though.
I saw a seagull land on
the roof across from me
with a silk top hat on.
And I just had my glasses
changed recently too.
The world is full of
unidentified objects
as far as I'm concerned.
As a matter of fact, my
own wife was frequently
an unidentified object
at 3:00 in the morning.
When I get up to go to the
john at 3:00 in the morning,
on my way back, I often
saw an unidentified object
approaching me down the
hall with the lights out.
It was only when she
got within 3 feet,
I would say, yeah,
that's my wife after all.
It's not a burglar or
anything sinister like that.
I'm surprised that people
identify so many objects
so easily.
The world consists mostly,
at least partially,
of unidentified objects.
Professor Timothy FX Finnegan
of the Royal Sir Myles
nag Copaleen Astro-Anomalistic
Society in Dalkey, Ireland,
sometime lecturer at Trinity
College, the founder of CSICON.
That's the Committee for
Surrealist Investigation
of Claims of the Normal.
CSICON has a
million dollar offer
to anybody who can produce
something totally normal.
If you can produce
a normal playmate
of the month, or
an average peacock,
or an ordinary Beethoven
sonata, or a typical view,
or an average man, they'll
give you a million dollars.
But they've got to
be typical, average,
and ordinary in all respects.
Not just slightly
in that direction.
They've got to be
totally typical.
Nobody's ever found
something totally normal.
Have you ever seen a
totally normal dog?
Have you ever seen
an average cat?
Has anybody seen an
ordinary rhinoceros?
Have you read an average haiku?
Professor Finnegan
is the one who's
computer-enhanced photos
conclusively demonstrated
that the Face on Mars
is Moishe Horwitz.
I mean, it was
conclusively proven
to those who were willing
to be conclusively convinced
by computer-enhanced
photographs.
Since I have in
my computer files
computer-enhanced photographs
of George Bush with cocaine
all over his lip while he's
taking his [INAUDIBLE].
I don't find
computer-enhanced photographs
entirely convincing.
But I admit that looking
at the photographs
I have seen of the face on
Mars, that it looks a lot more
like Moishe Horwitz than it
looks like Elvis Presley, which
is another popular theory.
Except among the disciples of
Richard Hoagland, who insist
it looks like the Sphinx.
And then there
are those dullards
who claim it looks like a
pile of rocks and shadows.
They haven't studied
Salvador Dali's
critical paranoiac methods.
If you want to read up on Dali's
critical paranoiac method,
go to my website.
Click on the article on
CSICON, the Committee
for Surrealist Investigation
of Claims of the Normal.
At the end of
that, you can click
on Salvador Dali's critical
paranoiac method, which
shows you how looking at the
tiles on the bathroom floor,
you can see faces,
clouds, Mickey Mouse.
You can see all sorts of
things, especially if you're
constipated and sitting
there for a long time
and getting bored.
What I'm waiting
for is somebody who
has carried the critical
paranoiac method far enough
to publish a whole book-length
proof that the Face on Mars
is not a face at all but a body.
And it's Miss February,
1966, in "Playboy."
That, I think, would
really show the power
of human imagination, which
William Blake said was just
another name for the divine.
Saying the human imagination
is another name for the divine
is a backwards way of
saying the divine is
another name for human
imagination, I suppose.
Speaking of the
science of his day,
they say the sun is
only a burning rock.
I say, no, no, no.
It is a million angels singing
glory to God in the highest.
Hallelujah.
Now in ordinary
Aristotelian logic,
we've got to decide
which is right.
Are the scientists of the
18th century right in calling
the sun a burning rock?
Or was Blake right in seeing
it as a million angels
singing glory, glory, et cetera.
I don't think we have to choose.
If you want to do
18th century science,
consider it a burning rock.
If you want to
write good poetry,
consider it a band of angels.
What matters is your purpose
and how your perceptions
suit your purpose.
I believe Blake did see
it as a million angels.
I can see it as a million
angels, especially when I
dropped acid that day.
But sometimes, even
when I haven't.
In the question period, most
times, most places I appear,
there's one question that
almost always pops up.
And that question is,
are you still doing acid?
I don't know why people
keep thinking I'm the one
to ask that question to.
Maybe because there's so many
references to acid in my books,
nobody ever thinks I
might be making it all up.
Maybe.
When people started
asking me that question,
are you still doing acid?
I used to answer, you
tell me how much you
cheated on your
income tax last year,
and I'll answer your question.
That generally shut them up.
But I felt that was a bit
hostile, so I've changed it.
Now when people ask me,
are you still doing acid?
I always answer emphatically, I
haven't done acid in two days,
and it's great to
be clean at last.
I may even get appointed the
next drug czar, who knows,
with a line like that.
Did you ever stop
to consider how
we got a czarist
government in this country
in the first place?
I'm going to give you a
theory of modern history.
And please put it in the
maybe mold as much as you can.
Or as Aleister
Crowley used to say,
"Don't believe me, believe
your own common sense."
In 1945, General
Reinhard Gehlen,
who was the chief of
the Soviet intelligence
section of Hitler's Secret
Service, as the American armies
overran Germany,
General Reinhard
piled all the documents
he had about Soviet
Russia into a couple of trucks.
Drove them to an unknown
location and buried them.
And then drove to the
nearest American army troops
he could find and surrendered,
telling them what he had
and also telling them about
his connections in the Soviet
Union, which included General
Vlasov of the Red Army, who
was a czarist who had
infiltrated the Red Army
with a leader of a czarist
group within the communist
government, intent on
overturning the communists
and restoring czarism.
Well, by the time
the word got back
to the Office of Strategic
Service, the forerunner
of the CIA, they for General
Gehlen out of his Nazi uniform
into an American
general's uniform.
He was flown back to
Washington, became
part of the US
Army intelligence.
Pretty soon, he was
transferred to the CIA
after that was created.
Went back to
Germany and ran what
was called the Gehlen Apparat,
which was in close contact
with General Vlasov
and other czarists
within the Soviet government.
And so the presidents of the
United States from Truman,
Eisenhower onward,
Kennedy, Johnson,
and so on up through Reagan,
and George I, and Slick Willie,
and George II, His Royal
Fraudulency, all of them
were getting their basic
information about the Soviet
Union by way of a
Nazi general who
got his information from
czarists within Soviet Russia.
Which I think explains
why the rest of the world
gradually came to the conclusion
that American foreign policy
was batshit crazy.
Nazis, and czarists, and
spooks, oh, my, as it
says in "The Wizard of Oz."
Well, more and more
American foreign policy
was influenced by
czarism, until finally,
American domestic policy began
to be influenced by czarism.
I've got a yoga exercise
for you like you've never
heard of before.
And matter of fact, it's
not a yoga exercise at all.
I'm just calling it
that to intrigue you.
Go to your dictionary.
In the back of your dictionary,
any good-size dictionary,
they got a historical document
called the United States
Constitution.
They keep it in
print in dictionaries
as a historical
curiosity because it
has no relevance at
all to how the United
States is run these days.
After the main body
of the Constitution,
then comes the first 10
amendments which are generally
called the Bill of Rights.
Read that.
Read it slowly, carefully,
and thoughtfully.
And see if any of those rights
are still guaranteed to us.
Every single one of them has
been nullified by one Supreme
Court or another.
I'll just start
with the first one.
It says, "Congress shall make no
law abridging freedom of speech
or of the press."
Now as Justice Black pointed
out in one of his dissents,
not only does "no" seem
to mean "no" in most
cases in the English language,
when people who are writing
happen to be literate, when
they write "no," they mean "no."
But we have plenty of evidence
in the letters, diaries,
and other writings of the
authors of the Constitution.
They were very
versatile, eloquent,
and adept in the use
of style in language.
Like the Elizabethan age
was the great age of poetry
in the English language,
the late 18th century
was probably the greatest
age of prose we ever had.
We had more great prose
stylists at the end.
We had Gibbon, and Hume,
and Burke in England.
Oh, Burke came from
Ireland, actually.
Let's not give the
English credit for one
single Irishman
that they adopted.
And over here, we had Jefferson,
and Adams, and Madison.
It was a fantastic age
for clear, crisp prose.
And so when they wrote "none,"
when they said "no laws,"
they almost certainly
meant no laws.
But if you want to be really
tricky, you might say,
they left out a letter,
and they meant one law.
Congress shall establish one
law abridging freedom of speech.
That's quite a stretcher.
But a good sophist,
somebody who studied logic
with the ancient Greeks and
philosophy with Plato and so
on, might be able to
put across an argument
that when they wrote "no
laws," they meant "one law."
But Justice Black never
believed that because he said,
"no laws," to me, seems
to mean "no laws."
Probably, the problem is I'm
still a farm boy at heart.
I don't know what my
problem is, but to me,
"no laws" means "no laws" too.
But we not only have
a Supreme Court--
have had several Supreme
Courts over the last 200 years
which have decided that "no
laws" not only means "one law,"
it means "many laws."
We have many laws
abridging freedom of speech
and of the press.
What the hell happened
to the Bill of Rights?
That's only one clause.
Read the rest of
the Bill of Rights.
See if any of the
things guaranteed
in the Bill of
Rights are still part
of the law in this country.
I read the whole damn
thing very carefully,
both straight and stoned.
This is something I
learned from Timothy Leary.
If you want to understand
anything, read it straight,
then read it stoned, and
then read it straight again.
It's also the best way to write.
Write straight, then
rewrite stoned, and then
rewrite straight again.
Well, that's the way
my prose is produced.
And I got a lot
of fans, so there
must be something in that
theory of composition.
Now I'm not saying the
Constitution is perfect.
The Constitution is
definitely flawed, especially
in relation to slavery.
But by and large,
the Constitution
is a much better system
than what we've got now.
There's no place in
the Constitution,
by the way, where it
says that Congress
or any other branch
of government
should supervise our
medicine or our recreations.
That's also totally
unconstitutional.
But we got a czar in
charge of supervising both.
That's a result of General
Gehlen and the Gehlen Apparat,
and the gradual takeover
of our government.
When the czarists took over
our government in the 1920s,
they didn't appoint
an official czar
until the end of the 1980s.
But now they're coming out
in the open, more and more.
Now what a czar is
based on, Trotsky
called it a combination
of European monarchism
and oriental despotism.
I think we've passed the
stage of European monarchism
and entered the stage
oriental despotism,
extreme right-wing
czarism during Bush I. Now
we're approaching total
oriental despotism.
>>I'd like to ask something,
but I would not like a maybe.
Regarding "The Illuminati,"
how much is it science fiction
and how much is it real?
Well, it's all
science fiction maybe.
And some of it is real maybe.
The original title
of "Illuminatus!"
was "Illuminatus!
A Head Test."
And for some reason, Dell
took the subtitle off.
I don't know why.
But the whole point is to make
the reader think for herself
or himself and decide
how much is real
and how much is science fiction.
And it would ruin the
whole game if I told you.
And besides, I can't tell you.
I don't know how much is
real and how much is fiction.
That's assuming I possessed the
objective, absolute authority
that 19th century novelist
all pretended to possess,
the impersonal narrative voice.
And "Illuminatus!" does not have
one single impersonal narrative
voice in it.
It's got 101 narrators, all of
whom have different prejudices.
You've got to
decide for yourself
which ones to trust if you're
going to trust any of them.
I didn't invent that technique.
Joyce used it in
"Ulysses," by the way.
I think it's the only way to
write a novel contemporary
with our times in which
unanimity has entirely
disappeared.
Nobody believes in objectivity
anymore except Ayn Rand,
who was a speed freak.
We're all very well aware
of neurological relativism,
whether we use that
word for it or not.
All of my books are
deliberately constructed so
that the reader
can't [AUDIO OUT]
and when I'm telling the truth.
By the way, does anybody
know who Moishe Horwitz is?
He's the Face on Mars according
to Timothy FX Finnegan.
What?
What was the answer?
Nobody knows who
Moishe Horwitz is.
Find out who Moishe Horwitz is.
Then you'll figure out
whether I invented Timothy FX
Finnegan or he really exists.
And then you might
have a better chance
of figuring out what the hell
the Face on Mars really is.
If you believe the word "really"
means something and the word
"is" really means something.
As far as I'm
concerned, I've never
found any use of the
word "is" where it
doesn't mean "it seems to me."
And yet, it confuses you into
thinking you're not talking
about your own reactions.
You're talking about
something quote "objective."
>>When's your next book?
>>I don't know when
it's coming out.
I haven't finished it.
But it's called "The
Tale of the Tribe."
And it's a study of the
influence of Ezra Pound's
"Cantos" and James
Joyce's "Finnegans
Wake" on the communication
theories of Marshall McLuhan,
which he wrote way back in
the dark ages of television
in the 1960s, which
I think are coming
true on the internet
in the 21st century.
So it's about how Joyce
and Pound are our best
guides to the emerging
multicultural world we're
entering in the 21st
century, in which we're
going to have to learn to speak
to people from other cultures
and understand them, and
help them understand us too.
Which is why "Finnegans
Wake" and "The Cantos"
are written in 20
languages or more.
Because they are
attempts to communicate
across cultural
boundaries, which
is what internet is more
and more teaching us
we've got to do.
I'm all for globalization,
unlike most radicals.
I just want it to come
from the grassroots
up and not from the
Federal Reserve Board down.
>>Right on.
[APPLAUSE]
>>Ah, we got some
other people here
who don't trust the
Federal Reserve.
That's good to know.
>>I was wondering what you
think about modern models
of consciousness evolution, like
Wilber Spectrum psychologies
compared to the Eight-Circuit
models of the brain.
>>Ken Wilber?
Yeah.
I have worked out
a correspondence
between Ken Wilber's Spectrum,
Gurdjieff's Vibration Levels,
and Leary's Eight-Circuits.
I think they're all saying
the same thing in sets
of three different metaphors.
I prefer Leary's because
I've been thinking
in terms of the nervous
system rather than in terms
of more abstract
and ghostly entities
ever since I got interested
in general semantics
about 45 years ago.
So Leary's system seems
more natural to me,
which does not mean it's the
best system for everybody.
It's just I'm used to
thinking in terms of how
does my nervous system
respond to this?
But I think the eight
levels, whether you
want to call them eight
circuits or eight spectrums.
They're all in "Finnegans
Wake" too, by the way.
They go back to the seven
souls of the Egyptians
and the seven chakras of the
various Hindu and Buddhist
systems.
I do think it's very easy
to make the distinction
between those levels.
And what language
you're going to use
to discuss it depends
on what language makes
most sense to you,
and what language you
think will make most sense to
the audience you're talking to.
If I were addressing a
theosophical convention,
I'd use Ken Wilber's terms.
If I were addressing, as
I did a few years ago,
the Institute for
General Semantics,
I used Leary's
neurological terms.
It depends on who
you're talking to.
And I can use the Gurdjieff
system pretty well by now too
if I happen to be talking
to a bunch of Fourth Wayers
or whatever they call
themselves nowadays.
Does that answer
your question, maybe?
>>I was wondering what you
think about the emerging
popularization of
transpersonal psychology.
Leary was saying the
same stuff 30 years ago.
And just how it affects
culture the same way.
Wilber is much more accepted
than Leary ever was.
>>Oh, well of course.
He's 100% acid-free.
Well, actually,
I'm more interested
in transpirational
linguistics than
in transpirational psychology.
I know the people
at Berkeley who
invented transpirational
linguistics, which fits in
very well with Benjamin Lee
Whorf's metalinguistics,
Korzybski's general
semantics, and Bandler's
neurolinguistic programming.
I do believe we live
in mostly acceptance
for certain special
states of consciousness.
We live mostly in
a web of words.
And learning which
words control us
and how to take control
over the words seems--
The whole area that Korzybski
called neurosemantics
and Bandler called
neurolinguistics,
this seems to me
the most vital thing
to study because we're
communicating all the time.
Even when we're not
talking to somebody else,
we're communicating to ourselves
in words most of the time.
And to learn which
words are hypnotizing us
and which words
can dehypnotize us.
Korzybski believed we
should all learn mathematics
to break the spell that
Indo-European has on
making us think of
actor-action, the thing
acted upon, which is not the
way the universe is constructed
at all.
And I used to go
around for years,
urging people to learn more
mathematics until I found out
that most people would
rather cut their throats
than try to study mathematics.
So now I found an easier way.
I just tell them
to study Chinese.
If you study Chinese
at all, you'll
find that doesn't have a
subject-predicate structure
either.
And every noun is a verb.
As Ernest Fenollosa
said in his essay,
"The Chinese Written Character
as a Medium for Poetry,"
"In ideogramic languages, the
verb and the noun are one.
Motion in things,
things in motion."
If Dr. Kaku is here,
I think he'd agree,
that's the best
one-sentence summary
of modern physics ever written.
Fenollosa did not
know one bloody thing
about modern physics.
He was just trying to describe
how you have to think in order
to read Chinese ideograms.
So if you can't study
math, study Chinese.
And if Chinese is
too hard for you,
try an American Indian language.
They also don't have the
subject-predicate structure.
And I think I better
get off so you
have a little rest before
the next speaker comes on.
Thank you very
much for your time.
>>I'm not bad for a guy
who's half asleep, eh?
>>What's that?
>>Not bad for a guy
who's half asleep.
>>You did good, man.